The Joe Rogan experience.
Was that one of the reasons why it was treated with so much skepticism.
Uh, because, uh, w w I mean,
no one doubts the existence of the skeleton, uh, at least, you know, no, no one.
Since I'm sorry, there's so many things that are so specific,
like the, the carbon dating of the upper and lower layers,
the fact that you have so many bones,
the fact that they're not repeating the fact that it's a clearly some sort of a
primate, and that you've put all this stuff together and reconstruct the skull.
And I mean, what is the controversy.
Uh, the controversy, uh, well, there's a couple of things. I mean,
you could talk for a long time about this, but, uh,
I guess one point of controversy is,
is it indeed a member of the human family? And, uh,
you know, as I said before, you get further back in time,
and the things that tell you,
it's a member of the human family become more subtle, like these canine teeth,
for example, uh, uh, the bipedality is, is another one, but, you know,
there's, you know, a great deal of skepticism in the field about, you know,
there there's people who, who, uh, who I talked to who tell you,
who doubt that any of these early species that have been
identified as hominins or early members of the human family,
they doubt that any of them really are, or, or that's just unknowable.
So this kind of like this, this, um, I don't know, almost in some people this,
this, uh, uh,
almost like neolistic view that you can really ever know that that's that's one.
Uh, um, but I, but I do think that is the, the, the,
uh, validation of already as a member of the human
family, the human lineage is, um, I,
I think there is a growing number of people who are, who are accepting it. Uh,
and there's some people with a lot of outside people who have basically
endorsed what the research team at S you know,
had said, you know, whether it's a direct ancestor or like, you know,
one of your extinct and uncle, you know,
maybe it's not your grandfather, but maybe it's like your aunt I'll go,
you know, that's, we, we may never know that, but, um, uh, so anyway,
that's one point of controversy, is it, is it in R D the human lineage? Uh,
another one is, um,
the arguments that the discovery team has made about what it reveals about the
last common ancestor of humans and apes. And, uh, you know,
like for example, we were talking before about,
about this model of a Chimp, like common ancestor of humans and,
and, uh, African apes. And, uh, you know, the,
the RD team would spent 15 years studying this thing before they announced
it to the world. They, uh,
believe and strenuously argued that this skeleton shows you
that the common ancestor of humans in the African apes was in fact,
not like a Chimp, not nowhere near as Chimp,
like as everyone thought, because there's no vestige of knuckle walking.
I mean, there's a whole bunch of things that gets into sort of, I guess,
some anatomical, very esoteric, anatomical stuff. So if you,
if you're reading the book, if you're interested,
cause it gets into two to do all that. But, uh, uh,
so anyway, so that's, that's part of the controversy. Uh, so, um, so there,
there, there is a sort of subset of the critics who have come to
accept already as indeed a member of the human family. So they say, yeah,
they're, they're right. They placed it correctly in the,
in the human family tree, but they are not yet convinced that it,
it, that it, it, it falsifies this idea of a Chimp like ancestor, you know,
their argument would be well sure. In ways that are already,
may have still descended from this Chimp like ancestor, but, you know, it,
uh,
evolve these new adaptations that sort of erase those from
its anatomy. So that that's one element of controversy. Uh, I mean, there's,
there's, uh, you know, the great thing about this skeleton actually, because it,
because it is so complete and because it
was released with this huge package of it as whole,
a whole series of paper about, you know, the hand on the foot, you know, the,
the pelvis and the skull, there was, um,
a lot of fodder there for debate and disagreement, and that's,
what's been happening for the last 10 years.
Now, when they talk about a Chimp ancestor,
a Chimp like amp ancestor, is this just because chimps are around,
we know genetically that we're at least closely related to champs.
And so it's just presumed.
And is it possible that there was that all the way back,
like from the beginning that our ancestors were bipedal?
Uh, well, I don't, I don't think many people would say, well, ancestors, uh, of.
Human, right? Like when you look at RD,
RD is the oldest known full skeleton that we have of our ancestors.
If we go back, if we somehow,
or another found something that was 12 million years old,
what if that thing was bipedal?
Okay. Well, okay.
So one problem is that this split between humans and in and champs,
it's probably not that old. So if you're at 12 million,
you're probably somewhere before the huge ships, Jim Smith. I mean,
there's a lot of like squished time in this. So, you know, and actually,
I think actually as it happens, I think some of the,
the estimates that are kind of furthest out are in fact 12 million, but,
you know,
somewhere between six and 12 million where they were humans and chimps split,
it's.
Kind of, and what are they,
but they do think that once upon a time there was a split between humans and
chimps. So if you go back far enough,
you'll find a Chimp or something like a chap. Well.
You'll, you'll find an ancestor of a chip.
And then the big question is it doesn't look like a modern gimp or does it look
like something you've never seen before?
Or does it look like something that's sort of a more primitive version of
artifice? I mean, this is, this is the great another one. I mean, this is like,
of course another quest, uh, you know, for, for science.
[Inaudible] was really a monkey wrench into this whole idea of what we, yeah.
Yeah. So that, that was what,
what was one of the things that was quite controversial about it? And, you know,
we haven't talked much about the discovery team that put this together, uh,
but they are, um, uh, you know, they're, they're, they're,
they're very good scholars. They're very good at what they do,
but they're also quite provocative and, uh, which, which, you know, for me,
of course made them great material, but you know,
they don't present the skeleton and say here, you know,
here's a physical description of the skeleton,
go ahead and make up your own minds. They presented it. And it said,
here is a know skeleton,
and this is why you're wrong and you're wrong and you're wrong.
And you're right. So there, it was, it was a provocative, uh,
it was a provocative series of papers with,
with some stunning revelations, but a lot of,
some people in the research community did not take kindly to the mode of
presentation. Let's, let's say, um, uh, cause you know, at one point,
um, you know, there's this, there's this, there's this huge, uh,
research community that studied chimpanzees, you know,
either at study them in the field,
doing observational studies or dyed them in the lab to try to find
clues about the origin of human locomotion or, or anything. I mean,
chimps are kind of became this all purpose model.
And so when the army team came along and told them they're all
kind of barking up the wrong tree, there was,
there was a lot of consternation about that.
Episodes of the Joe Rogan experience are now free on Spotify. That's right.
They're free from September 1st is December 1st.
They're going to be available everywhere,
but after December 1st they will only be available on Spotify,
but they will be free. That includes the video. The video will also be there.
It'll also be free. That's all we're asking. Just go download Spotify much.
Buh-bye.